README.md, before:

# Explainer for HTML Fullscreen Without A Gesture

This proposal is an early design sketch by Chrome's Web Apps & Capabilities (Fugu) team to describe the problem below and solicit
feedback on the proposed solution. It has not been approved to ship in Chrome.

## Proponents

- Chrome's Web Apps & Capabilities (Fugu) team

## Participate
- https://github.com/explainers-by-googlers/html-fullscreen-without-a-gesture/issues
- https://github.com/whatwg/fullscreen/issues [TODO: specific issue number]

## Table of Contents

<!-- Update this table of contents by running `npx doctoc README.md` -->
<!-- START doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->
<!-- DON'T EDIT THIS SECTION, INSTEAD RE-RUN doctoc TO UPDATE -->

- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Goals](#goals)
- [Use cases](#use-cases)
- [Enable User Agent configurations that permit fullscreen requests without transient activation](#enable-user-agent-configurations-that-permit-fullscreen-requests-without-transient-activation)
  - [Example](#example)
  - [How this solution would solve the use cases](#how-this-solution-would-solve-the-use-cases)
- [Detailed design discussion](#detailed-design-discussion)
  - [Permission API integration](#permission-api-integration)
  - [UI changes](#ui-changes)
  - [Feature detection](#feature-detection)
- [Security Considerations](#security-considerations)
- [Privacy Considerations](#privacy-considerations)
- [Considered alternatives](#considered-alternatives)
  - [Multiple fullscreens from one gesture](#multiple-fullscreens-from-one-gesture)
  - [Fullscreen popups](#fullscreen-popups)
- [Stakeholder Feedback / Opposition](#stakeholder-feedback--opposition)
- [References & acknowledgements](#references--acknowledgements)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->

## Introduction

Sites entering [HTML Fullscreen](https://fullscreen.spec.whatwg.org/) require [transient activation](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/interaction.html#transient-activation) from a user gesture. While that is generally a useful safeguard, it also prohibits some advanced windowing capabilities.

This explainer proposes an algorithmic change to [`Element.requestFullscreen()`](https://fullscreen.spec.whatwg.org/#dom-element-requestfullscreen), enabling User Agent configurations that permit fullscreen requests without transient activation.

## Goals

Unlock a broad set of advanced fullscreen capabilities to enable smooth end-user experiences.

## Use cases

Virtual Desktop Infrastructure (VDI) clients connect users with remote desktop or app content from a local device, providing immersive computing experiences on the web. Those apps present compelling use cases for showing content fullscreen without stringent transient activation requirements, particularly on multi-screen devices.

* Show fullscreen remote desktop content on multiple displays with one user gesture
* Automatically extend a fullscreen desktop session onto a newly connected display
* Swap fullscreen windows between displays with one user gesture
* Request fullscreen after transient activation expiry, e.g. slow remote host response
* Open a popup and make it fullscreen with one user gesture
* Apply remote app fullscreen state locally, e.g. on app launch or system events

This functionality would also prove useful for finance, medical, signage, gaming, creativity, and presentation web app use cases.

## Enable User Agent configurations that permit fullscreen requests without transient activation

This potential solution extends step #5 of the [`Element.requestFullscreen()`](https://fullscreen.spec.whatwg.org/#dom-element-requestfullscreen) algorithm to accommodate user agent configurations that permit fullscreen requests without transient activation.

Before (*[sic]* [orientation dfn link broken](https://github.com/whatwg/fullscreen/issues/215)):
* [This](https://webidl.spec.whatwg.org/#this)’s [relevant global object](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/webappapis.html#concept-relevant-global) has [transient activation](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/interaction.html#transient-activation) or the algorithm is [triggered by a user generated orientation change](https://w3c.github.io/screen-orientation/#dfn-triggered-by-a-user-generated-orientation-change).

After:
* [This](https://webidl.spec.whatwg.org/#this)’s [relevant global object](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/webappapis.html#concept-relevant-global) has [transient activation](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/interaction.html#transient-activation), the algorithm is [triggered by a user generated orientation change](https://w3c.github.io/screen-orientation/#dfn-triggered-by-a-user-generated-orientation-change), or the user agent has been configured to permit fullscreen without [transient activation](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/interaction.html#transient-activation).

### Example 

```js
initiateMultiScreenFullscreenButton.addEventListener('click', async () => {
  let screenDetails = await window.getScreenDetails();

  // Make the current window fullscreen on its current screen.
  document.documentElement.requestFullscreen({screen : screenDetails.currentScreen});

  // Open a fullscreen popup on each other screen.
  for (let s of screenDetails.screens.filter(s => s !== screenDetails.currentScreen)) {
    let popup = window.open(getUrlForScreen(s), '_blank', `popup,left=${s.availLeft},top=${s.availTop},width=${s.availWidth},height=${s.availHeight}`);
    popup.addEventListener('load', () => { popup.document.documentElement.requestFullscreen({screen : s}); });
  }
});
```

### How this solution would solve the use cases

This uses existing [Window Management API](https://w3c.github.io/window-management/) surfaces to [request detailed screen information](https://w3c.github.io/window-management/#usage-overview-screen-details) then place [windows](https://w3c.github.io/window-management/#usage-overview-place-windows-on-a-specific-screen) and [fullscreen content](https://w3c.github.io/window-management/#usage-overview-place-fullscreen-content-on-a-specific-screen) on specific screens. Users must grant Window Management permission, and configure their user agent to unblock popups and (NEW) permit fullscreen without transient activation in the relevant context.

Otherwise, corresponding functionality requires cumbersome user interactions to open and fullscreen each window:
* The user must click once to open each popup, or interact with blocked popup UIs, if popups are blocked.
* The user must manually place each popup on its intended screen, if Window Management permission is not granted.
* The user must click each popup to enter fullscreen, if fullscreen without transient activation is blocked.

## Detailed design discussion

The [Window Management API](https://w3c.github.io/window-management/) provides relevant multi-screen content placement features ([MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Window_Management_API)).

User Agents widely support configurations that block or allow the creation of popup windows without transient activation. That is reflected in [The rules for choosing a navigable](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/document-sequences.html#the-rules-for-choosing-a-navigable) when a new [top-level traversable](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/document-sequences.html#top-level-traversable) is being requested, as invoked by [`Window.open()`](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/nav-history-apis.html#dom-open-dev):

* If currentNavigable's [active window](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/document-sequences.html#nav-window) does not have [transient activation](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/interaction.html#transient-activation) and the user agent has been configured to not show popups (i.e., the user agent has a "popup blocker" enabled)
  * The user agent may inform the user that a popup has been blocked.

This proposal aims to offer similar flexibility for fullscreen window management, so VDI clients and other advanced web apps can offer high quality fullscreen experiences that match user expecations.

### Permission API integration

This proposal avoids [Permission API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Permissions_API) integration for now, since most sites will not need this capability, which raises nuanced security considerations.

It is possible to add Permission API integration in the future, by defining a new [powerful feature](https://w3c.github.io/permissions/#dfn-powerful-feature), e.g. `automatic-fullscreen`.

### UI changes

User agents share some common patterns around UI treatments for setting configurations, [Fullscreen UI](https://fullscreen.spec.whatwg.org/#ui), and blocked popup notifications. This proposal doesn’t make specific UI recommendations.

### Feature detection

Feature detection could be useful. Here is a proposed Web IDL shape that parallels the existing [`Document.fullscreenEnabled`](https://fullscreen.spec.whatwg.org/#ref-for-dom-document-fullscreenenabled).

```JS
partial interface Document {
  readonly attribute boolean fullscreenRequiresTransientActivation;
}
```

Alternately, sites could call requestFullscreen on a detached DOM element without a gesture, and assess the `TypeError` message, if user agents surface transient activation errors over detached node errors (not currently true in Chrome), but sites would need fragile implementation-specific logic:

```JS
if (!navigator.userActivation.isActive) {
  document.createElement('div').requestFullscreen().catch(e => {
    if (e instanceof TypeError) {
      if (e.message === "Permissions check failed")
        console.log("Fullscreen requires a gesture");
      else if (e.message === "Element is not connected")
        console.log("Fullscreen does not require a gesture");
  });
}
```

Permission API integration is another viable alternative, if deemed appropriate:
```JS
navigator.permissions.query({name: 'automatic-fullscreen'});

// OR:
navigator.permissions.query({name: 'fullscreen', withoutUserGesture: true});
```

## Security Considerations

Fullscreen web content poses spoofing risks and other usable security concerns. Sites entering fullscreen without transient activation will exacerbate those concerns.

User agents should offer controls with adequate disclaimers, allowing savvy users or administrators to grant this powerful web capability in trusted contexts, but most users and sites would not need this functionality. Foregoing Permission API integration prevents sites from prompting users in drive-by web experiences. User agents could reasonably restrict this configuration to security-sensitive apps, like Chrome’s [Isolated Web Apps](https://chromestatus.com/feature/5146307550248960).

User Agents could improve their own fullscreen user interfaces to better convey window states and state transitions, especially in sensitive situations. User agents could present blocking or persistent user interface surfaces with prominent security context when sites enter fullscreen without transient activation.

## Privacy Considerations

This feature does not directly expose any information to sites, and there are no significant privacy considerations to note.

## Considered alternatives

### Multiple fullscreens from one gesture

Another [explainer](https://github.com/w3c/window-management/blob/main/EXPLAINER_initiating_multi_screen_experiences.md) considered initiating multi-screen experience from a single user gesture. That was far more complex and restrictive, but most importantly, VDI web development partners ultimately require some functionality without any user gesture.

### Fullscreen popups 

Another [explainer](https://github.com/w3c/window-management/blob/main/EXPLAINER_fullscreen_popups.md) and ongoing [chrome experiment](https://chromestatus.com/feature/6002307972464640) ([blog post](https://developer.chrome.com/blog/fullscreen-popups-origin-trial/)) considered creating fullscreen popup windows, but that did not meet VDI web development partner requirements, particularly for making pre-existing windows fullscreen, and waiving user gesture requirements.

## Stakeholder Feedback / Opposition

Web Developers have requested relevant functionality in the [Window Management API Issue tracker](https://github.com/w3c/window-management/issues):
 - [window.open should support the 'fullscreen' option #7](https://github.com/w3c/window-management/issues/7)
 - [Feature Request: Initiate a multi-screen experience from a single user activation #98](https://github.com/w3c/window-management/issues/98)
 - [Feature request: Fullscreen support on multiple screens #92](https://github.com/w3c/window-management/issues/92)

Publicly stated positions from implementors have been requested:
- [TODO: link requests]

Additional discussion can be found on the [Fullscreen API Issue tracker](https://github.com/whatwg/fullscreen/issues):
- [TODO: Link specific issue]
- This compliments [Proposal: Supporting fullscreen requests in multi-screen environments. #161](https://github.com/whatwg/fullscreen/issues/161)

## References & acknowledgements

Many thanks for valuable feedback and advice from many folks, especially:

- ayuishii
- bradtriebwasser
- takumif

Commit message:

Link spec issue and illustrative PR

README.md, after:

# Explainer for HTML Fullscreen Without A Gesture

This proposal is an early design sketch by Chrome's Web Apps & Capabilities (Fugu) team to describe the problem below and solicit
feedback on the proposed solution. It has not been approved to ship in Chrome.

## Proponents

- Chrome's Web Apps & Capabilities (Fugu) team

## Participate
- https://github.com/explainers-by-googlers/html-fullscreen-without-a-gesture/issues
- https://github.com/whatwg/fullscreen/issues/234

## Table of Contents

<!-- Update this table of contents by running `npx doctoc README.md` -->
<!-- START doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->
<!-- DON'T EDIT THIS SECTION, INSTEAD RE-RUN doctoc TO UPDATE -->

- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Goals](#goals)
- [Use cases](#use-cases)
- [Enable User Agent configurations that permit fullscreen requests without transient activation](#enable-user-agent-configurations-that-permit-fullscreen-requests-without-transient-activation)
  - [Example](#example)
  - [How this solution would solve the use cases](#how-this-solution-would-solve-the-use-cases)
- [Detailed design discussion](#detailed-design-discussion)
  - [Permission API integration](#permission-api-integration)
  - [UI changes](#ui-changes)
  - [Feature detection](#feature-detection)
- [Security Considerations](#security-considerations)
- [Privacy Considerations](#privacy-considerations)
- [Considered alternatives](#considered-alternatives)
  - [Multiple fullscreens from one gesture](#multiple-fullscreens-from-one-gesture)
  - [Fullscreen popups](#fullscreen-popups)
- [Stakeholder Feedback / Opposition](#stakeholder-feedback--opposition)
- [References & acknowledgements](#references--acknowledgements)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->

## Introduction

Sites entering [HTML Fullscreen](https://fullscreen.spec.whatwg.org/) require [transient activation](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/interaction.html#transient-activation) from a user gesture. While that is generally a useful safeguard, it also prohibits some advanced windowing capabilities.

This explainer proposes an algorithmic change to [`Element.requestFullscreen()`](https://fullscreen.spec.whatwg.org/#dom-element-requestfullscreen), enabling User Agent configurations that permit fullscreen requests without transient activation.

## Goals

Unlock a broad set of advanced fullscreen capabilities to enable smooth end-user experiences.

## Use cases

Virtual Desktop Infrastructure (VDI) clients connect users with remote desktop or app content from a local device, providing immersive computing experiences on the web. Those apps present compelling use cases for showing content fullscreen without stringent transient activation requirements, particularly on multi-screen devices.

* Show fullscreen remote desktop content on multiple displays with one user gesture
* Automatically extend a fullscreen desktop session onto a newly connected display
* Swap fullscreen windows between displays with one user gesture
* Request fullscreen after transient activation expiry, e.g. slow remote host response
* Open a popup and make it fullscreen with one user gesture
* Apply remote app fullscreen state locally, e.g. on app launch or system events

This functionality would also prove useful for finance, medical, signage, gaming, creativity, and presentation web app use cases.

## Enable User Agent configurations that permit fullscreen requests without transient activation

This potential solution extends step #5 of the [`Element.requestFullscreen()`](https://fullscreen.spec.whatwg.org/#dom-element-requestfullscreen) algorithm to accommodate user agent configurations that permit fullscreen requests without transient activation. See an illustrative PR: [WIP: Enable configuration for fullscreen without transient activation #235](https://github.com/whatwg/fullscreen/pull/235)

Before (*[sic]* [orientation dfn link broken](https://github.com/whatwg/fullscreen/issues/215)):
* [This](https://webidl.spec.whatwg.org/#this)’s [relevant global object](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/webappapis.html#concept-relevant-global) has [transient activation](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/interaction.html#transient-activation) or the algorithm is [triggered by a user generated orientation change](https://w3c.github.io/screen-orientation/#dfn-triggered-by-a-user-generated-orientation-change).

After:
* [This](https://webidl.spec.whatwg.org/#this)’s [relevant global object](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/webappapis.html#concept-relevant-global) has [transient activation](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/interaction.html#transient-activation), the algorithm is [triggered by a user generated orientation change](https://w3c.github.io/screen-orientation/#dfn-triggered-by-a-user-generated-orientation-change), or the user agent has been configured to permit fullscreen without [transient activation](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/interaction.html#transient-activation).

### Example 

```js
initiateMultiScreenFullscreenButton.addEventListener('click', async () => {
  let screenDetails = await window.getScreenDetails();

  // Make the current window fullscreen on its current screen.
  document.documentElement.requestFullscreen({screen : screenDetails.currentScreen});

  // Open a fullscreen popup on each other screen.
  for (let s of screenDetails.screens.filter(s => s !== screenDetails.currentScreen)) {
    let popup = window.open(getUrlForScreen(s), '_blank', `popup,left=${s.availLeft},top=${s.availTop},width=${s.availWidth},height=${s.availHeight}`);
    popup.addEventListener('load', () => { popup.document.documentElement.requestFullscreen({screen : s}); });
  }
});
```

### How this solution would solve the use cases

This uses existing [Window Management API](https://w3c.github.io/window-management/) surfaces to [request detailed screen information](https://w3c.github.io/window-management/#usage-overview-screen-details) then place [windows](https://w3c.github.io/window-management/#usage-overview-place-windows-on-a-specific-screen) and [fullscreen content](https://w3c.github.io/window-management/#usage-overview-place-fullscreen-content-on-a-specific-screen) on specific screens. Users must grant Window Management permission, and configure their user agent to unblock popups and (NEW) permit fullscreen without transient activation in the relevant context.

Otherwise, corresponding functionality requires cumbersome user interactions to open and fullscreen each window:
* The user must click once to open each popup, or interact with blocked popup UIs, if popups are blocked.
* The user must manually place each popup on its intended screen, if Window Management permission is not granted.
* The user must click each popup to enter fullscreen, if fullscreen without transient activation is blocked.

## Detailed design discussion

The [Window Management API](https://w3c.github.io/window-management/) provides relevant multi-screen content placement features ([MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Window_Management_API)).

User Agents widely support configurations that block or allow the creation of popup windows without transient activation. That is reflected in [The rules for choosing a navigable](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/document-sequences.html#the-rules-for-choosing-a-navigable) when a new [top-level traversable](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/document-sequences.html#top-level-traversable) is being requested, as invoked by [`Window.open()`](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/nav-history-apis.html#dom-open-dev):

* If currentNavigable's [active window](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/document-sequences.html#nav-window) does not have [transient activation](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/interaction.html#transient-activation) and the user agent has been configured to not show popups (i.e., the user agent has a "popup blocker" enabled)
  * The user agent may inform the user that a popup has been blocked.

This proposal aims to offer similar flexibility for fullscreen window management, so VDI clients and other advanced web apps can offer high quality fullscreen experiences that match user expecations.

### Permission API integration

This proposal avoids [Permission API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Permissions_API) integration for now, since most sites will not need this capability, which raises nuanced security considerations.

It is possible to add Permission API integration in the future, by defining a new [powerful feature](https://w3c.github.io/permissions/#dfn-powerful-feature), e.g. `automatic-fullscreen`.

### UI changes

User agents share some common patterns around UI treatments for setting configurations, [Fullscreen UI](https://fullscreen.spec.whatwg.org/#ui), and blocked popup notifications. This proposal doesn’t make specific UI recommendations.

### Feature detection

Feature detection could be useful. Here is a proposed Web IDL shape that parallels the existing [`Document.fullscreenEnabled`](https://fullscreen.spec.whatwg.org/#ref-for-dom-document-fullscreenenabled).

```JS
partial interface Document {
  readonly attribute boolean fullscreenRequiresTransientActivation;
}
```

Alternately, sites could call requestFullscreen on a detached DOM element without a gesture, and assess the `TypeError` message, if user agents surface transient activation errors over detached node errors (not currently true in Chrome), but sites would need fragile implementation-specific logic:

```JS
if (!navigator.userActivation.isActive) {
  document.createElement('div').requestFullscreen().catch(e => {
    if (e instanceof TypeError) {
      if (e.message === "Permissions check failed")
        console.log("Fullscreen requires a gesture");
      else if (e.message === "Element is not connected")
        console.log("Fullscreen does not require a gesture");
  });
}
```

Permission API integration is another viable alternative, if deemed appropriate:
```JS
navigator.permissions.query({name: 'automatic-fullscreen'});

// OR:
navigator.permissions.query({name: 'fullscreen', withoutUserGesture: true});
```

## Security Considerations

Fullscreen web content poses spoofing risks and other usable security concerns. Sites entering fullscreen without transient activation will exacerbate those concerns.

User agents should offer controls with adequate disclaimers, allowing savvy users or administrators to grant this powerful web capability in trusted contexts, but most users and sites would not need this functionality. Foregoing Permission API integration prevents sites from prompting users in drive-by web experiences. User agents could reasonably restrict this configuration to security-sensitive apps, like Chrome’s [Isolated Web Apps](https://chromestatus.com/feature/5146307550248960).

User Agents could improve their own fullscreen user interfaces to better convey window states and state transitions, especially in sensitive situations. User agents could present blocking or persistent user interface surfaces with prominent security context when sites enter fullscreen without transient activation.

## Privacy Considerations

This feature does not directly expose any information to sites, and there are no significant privacy considerations to note.

## Considered alternatives

### Multiple fullscreens from one gesture

Another [explainer](https://github.com/w3c/window-management/blob/main/EXPLAINER_initiating_multi_screen_experiences.md) considered initiating multi-screen experience from a single user gesture. That was far more complex and restrictive, but most importantly, VDI web development partners ultimately require some functionality without any user gesture.

### Fullscreen popups 

Another [explainer](https://github.com/w3c/window-management/blob/main/EXPLAINER_fullscreen_popups.md) and ongoing [chrome experiment](https://chromestatus.com/feature/6002307972464640) ([blog post](https://developer.chrome.com/blog/fullscreen-popups-origin-trial/)) considered creating fullscreen popup windows, but that did not meet VDI web development partner requirements, particularly for making pre-existing windows fullscreen, and waiving user gesture requirements.

## Stakeholder Feedback / Opposition

Web Developers have requested relevant functionality in the [Window Management API Issue tracker](https://github.com/w3c/window-management/issues):
 - [window.open should support the 'fullscreen' option #7](https://github.com/w3c/window-management/issues/7)
 - [Feature Request: Initiate a multi-screen experience from a single user activation #98](https://github.com/w3c/window-management/issues/98)
 - [Feature request: Fullscreen support on multiple screens #92](https://github.com/w3c/window-management/issues/92)

Publicly stated positions from implementors have been requested:
- [TODO: link requests]

Additional discussion can be found on [Fullscreen API Issues](https://github.com/whatwg/fullscreen/issues):
- [Entering fullscreen without transient activation #234](https://github.com/whatwg/fullscreen/issues/234)
  - PR [WIP: Enable configuration for fullscreen without transient activation #235](https://github.com/whatwg/fullscreen/pull/235)
- This compliments [Proposal: Supporting fullscreen requests in multi-screen environments. #161](https://github.com/whatwg/fullscreen/issues/161)

## References & acknowledgements

Many thanks for valuable feedback and advice from many folks, especially:

- ayuishii
- bradtriebwasser
- takumif
